so that you can sail with the wind
coming at 90 degrees to the side of your
car that basically means that you're
going to be crosswind coming straight on
to the side of your kayak if you're
watching this video we're assuming that
you already know how to attach your sail
to your kayak that you've done lots of
wind paddle practice on dry land of
deploying holding and stowing your sail
and that you've also taken a good look
at the trimming videos and practice how
to trim your sail so getting back to
today okay so let's take a look at it
okay for this purpose it's now
positioned somewhere on the beach or at
home in your garden it doesn't matter
where with the wind coming sideways on
to the kayak and that's how you're going
to need to set up your kayak to practice
reaching with your sail so we're going
to deploy our sail first tease to sell
out a little bit take hold of the sale
sheets and one big pull upwards okay
our sail is now deployed remember with
the dryland practice of abuse we have
our paddle underneath our sail sheets so
we now have our pull cord nice and tight
so that the bottom of the sail can move
around on the deck of the kayak and in
this position we can downward sail and
without making any adjustment to walk so
ever to the pull cord or the trim of the
sail can actually sail up to a 45 degree
angle to the back of the kayak so use my
paddle we can steer to the right to
allow the wind to come at 45 degrees
behind me here we can steer to the left
allowing the wind to come at 45 degrees
to the other side so we have a 90 degree
paddling window without making any
adjustments to our sail if we move a
little bit more than 45 degrees up to
about 50 degrees we might notice that
the sale starts to collapse on the
windward side and it could collapse down
here like this if you notice that
happening you can take your paddle you
can stop the sail collapsing by placing
the back of the blade on the windward
edge of the paddle and that will stop
collapse you can then take the blade on
the leeward side of the car away from
the wind and at the same time use that
to steer the kayak back downwind so the
sand will fill again alternatively you
can do the same on the other side side
is going to collapse you can use the
left blade to stop the collapse use the
right blade to steer the car back down
wind so the wind paddle feels again okay
so you don't need to make any
adjustments to your sail if you're going
to sell within that 90 degree window
okay
if you're going to move beyond the 90
degree window and you actually want to
move so that the wind is coming right
across the side of the kayak you're
going to need to use your right hand if
you're gonna do a 90 degree reach once
you've done that so if we've got the
wind coming at 90 degrees to the side of
the kayak here we're gonna need to move
the sail across like this onto the
leeward side of the kayak okay so the
wind is gonna be coming from the right
here filling the sail and our carrier is
gonna be traveling at 90 degrees to the
wind if we don't have a rudder system we
can keep the kayak steering a 90 degrees
to the wind without it whether caulking
into the wind if you do not have a rotor
system you're going to need to use your
paddle as you can see I'm holding onto
the sheets here to stop the sail from
collapsing down into the water so you're
going to have to keep your sheets high
to one side nice and high like this and
the only way to do that if you have a
paddle is to use your leading hand here
to crimp the sheets and the paddle at
the same time the lower blade is going
to be in the water on the leeward side
of the kayak acting like a rudder to
stop the boat from weather cocking into
the wind so in this position here I can
actually sail my kayak at 90 degrees to
the wind okay
my draw cord is loose allowing the sail
to move to the leeward side of the kayak
my sail sheets are held high
with my leading paddling hand and my
lower blade is in the water
stopping the car where the cocking into
the wind so I can sail right at 90
degrees in the wind in this position if
you want to go back to downwind sailing
you just steer back downwind you can
then tighten up the draw cord again and
once again you are now downwind sailing
and with the sail in this position you
can easily work within the 90 degree
window of the wind coming at 45 degrees
to the back side either on the windward
side or the leeward side of the kayak
okay so in the next video clips were
actually going to be on the water and
we're going to be showing you how to do
all of this from a seagull bird's-eye
view on the water okay so we'll see you
then